---
author: Ayn Rand
id: 90
---

"It is not the works, but the belief which is here decisive and determines the order of rank––to employ once more an old religious formula with a new and deeper meaning,––it is some fundamental certainty which a noble soul has about itself, something which is not to be sought, is not to be found, and perhaps, also, is not to be lost. The noble soul has reverence for itself."
–– Friedrich Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil

This view of man has rarely been expressed in human history. Today, it is virtually non-existent. Yet this is the view with which––in various degrees of longing, wistfulness, passion and agonizing confusion––the best of mankind's youth start out in life. It is not even a view, for most of them, but a foggy, groping, undefined sense made of raw pain and incommunicable happiness. It is a sense of enormous expectation, the sense that one's life is important, that great achievements are within one's capacity, and that great things lie ahead.

...Some give up at the first touch of pressure; some sell out; some run down by imperceptible degrees and lose their fire, never knowing when or how they lost it. Then all of these vanish in the vast swamp of their elders who tell them persistently that maturity consists of abandoning one's mind; security, of abandoning one's values; practicality, of losing self-esteem. Yet a few hold on and move on, knowing that that fire is not to be betrayed, learning how to give it shape, purpose and reality. But whatever their future, at the dawn of their lives, men seek a noble vision of man's nature and of life's potential.